Before you can start programming computer games, you need to learn a few basic programming concepts first. You won't make games in this chapter, but knowing these concepts will make learning to program much easier. You can start by learning how to use Python’s interactive shell.

Open IDLE using the steps in Chapter 1, then get Python to solve some simple math stuff. The interactive shell can work just like a calculator. Type 2 + 2 into the interactive shell and press the ENTER key on your keyboard. (On some keyboards, this is the RETURN key.) Figure 2-1 shows how the IDLE responds with the number 4.

This math problem is a simple programming instruction. The + sign tells the computer to add the numbers 2 and 2. Table 2-1 lists the other math symbols available in Python. The - sign will subtract numbers, the * asterisk will multiply numbers, and the / slash will divide numbers.

When used in this way, +, -, *, and / are called operators because they tell Python which mathematical operation on the numbers surrounding them.

Integers and Floating Point Numbers

In programming, integers or ints are whole numbers such as 4, 99, and 0. Floating point numbers or floats are fractions or numbers with decimal points like 3.5, 42.1 and 5.0.. In Python, the number 5 is an integer, but 5.0 is a float.

These math problems are examples of expressions. Computers can solve millions of these problems in seconds. Expressions are made up of values (the numbers) connected by operators (the math signs). Let’s learn exactly what values and operators are. Try entering some of these math problems into the interactive shell, pressing ENTER key after each one.

After you type in the above instructions, the interactive shell will look like Figure 2-2.

Integers and floats are examples of values in programming. An expression is made up of values (such as integers like 8 and 6) connected by an operator (such as the * multiplication sign). A single value by itself is also considered an expression. In the 2  +       2 example, notice that you can put any amount of spaces in between the values and operators. However, be sure to always start at the beginning of the line with no spaces in front.

In the next chapter, we will learn about working with text in expressions. Python isn’t limited to just numbers; it’s more than just a fancy calculator!

When a computer solves the expression 10 + 5 and gets the value 15, it has evaluated the expression. Evaluating an expression reduces the expression to a single value, just like solving a math problem reduces the problem to a single number: the answer.

The expressions 10 + 5 and 10 + 3 + 2 have the same value, because they both evaluate to 15. Even single values are expressions: The expression 15 evaluates to the value 15.

Expressions can be of any size, but they will always evaluate down to a single value. For example, the expression 8 * 3 / 2 + 2 + 7 - 9 will evaluate down to the value 12.0 through the following steps:

You don’t see all of these steps. If you enter this expression into the interactive shell, you’ll just see the results:

Notice that the / division operator evaluates to a float value, as in 24 / 2 evaluating to 12.0. Also, that math operations with float values also evaluate to float values, as in 12.0 + 2 evaluating to 14.0.

If you enter 5 + into the interactive shell, you’ll get an error message.

This error happened because 5 + isn’t an expression. Expressions have values connected by operators, but the + operator always expects to connect two things in Python. We have only given it one. This is why the error message appeared. A syntax error means Python doesn’t understand the instruction you gave it because you typed it incorrectly. Python will always display an error message if you enter an instruction it cannot understand. A lot of computer programming isn’t just telling the computer what to do, but also knowing exactly how to tell the computer to do it.

Don’t worry about making mistakes though. Causing errors won’t damage your computer at all. Just retype the instruction correctly into the interactive shell at the next >>> prompt.

You’ll often want to save the value an expression evaluates to so you can use it later in the program. You can store values in variables. Think of variables like a box that can hold values. An assignment statement instruction will store a value (or the value an expression evaluates to) inside a variable. Make up a name for the variable, followed by the = sign (called the assignment operator), and then the value to store in the variable. For example, to store the integer value 15 in a variable named “spam”, enter spam = 15 into the interactive shell:

You can think of the variable like a box with the value 15 inside of it (as shown in Figure 2-4). The variable name “spam” is the label on the box (so you can tell one variable from another) and the value stored in it is like a small note inside the box.

When you press ENTER you won't see anything in response. In Python, you can assume the instruction executed successfully if no error message appears. The next >>> prompt will appear so you can type in the next instruction.

The assignment statement creates the variable spam and stores the value 15 in it. Unlike expressions, statements are instructions that do not evaluate to any value, which is why there is no value displayed on the next line in the interactive shell.

It might be confusing to know which instructions are expressions and which are statements. Just remember that expressions evaluate to a single value. Any other kind of instruction is a statement.

Variables store values, not expressions. For example, the statement spam = 10 + 5 and spam = 10 + 7 - 2 both evaluate the expression to 15 and then store the value 15 in the variable spam.

The first time you store a value inside a variable by using an assignment statement, Python will create that variable. Each time after, an assignment statement only replaces the value stored in the variable.

To check what value is in a variable, type the variable name by itself into the interactive shell:

The expression spam evaluates to the value inside the spam variable, 15. And here’s an interesting twist. If you enter spam + 5 into the interactive shell, you get the integer 20:

You’ve set the value of the variable spam to 15, so writing spam + 5 is like writing the expression 15 + 5.

If you try to use a variable before it is created, Python will give you an error because no such variable would exist yet. This also happens if you mistype the name of the variable:

You can change the value stored in a variable by entering another assignment statement. For example, try the following:

The first time you enter spam + 5, the expression evaluates to 20, because we stored the value 15 inside the variable spam. However, when you enter spam = 3, the value 15 is replaced, or overwritten, with the value 3. Now, when you enter spam + 5, the expression evaluates to 8 because the value of spam is now 3.

Because a variable is only a name for a value, you can write expressions with variables like this:

When the variable spam has the integer value 15 stored in it, entering spam + spam is the same as entering 15 + 15, which evaluates to 30. And spam - spam is the same as 15 - 15, which evaluates to 0. These expressions use the variable spam twice. You can use variables as many times as you want in expressions. Remember that Python will evaluate a variable name to the value that is stored inside that variable, each time the variable is used.

You can even use the value in the spam variable to assign spam a new value:

The assignment statement spam = spam + 5 is like saying, “the new value of the spam variable will be the current value of spam plus five.” Remember that the variable on the left side of the = sign will be assigned the value that the expression on the right side evaluates to. You can keep increasing the value in spam by 5 several times:

You can create as many variables as you need. For example, let’s assign different values to two variables named eggs and fizz, like so:

Now the fizz variable has 10 inside it, and eggs has 15 inside it.

Try assigning a new value to spam. Enter spam = fizz + eggs into the interactive shell then enter spam into the interactive shell to see the new value of spam.

The value in spam is now 25 because when we add fizz and eggs we are adding the values stored inside fizz and eggs.

Replacing the value in a variable with a new value is overwriting the value. It is important to know that the old value is permanently forgotten. If you want to remember this value so you can use it later in your program, store it in a different variable before overwriting the value:

In the above example, before overwriting the value in spam, we copy that value to a variable named oldSpam. At that point, both spam and oldSpam store the value 42. On the next line, 86 is stored in spam but oldSpam is left untouched.

In this chapter, you learned the basics about writing Python instructions. Python needs you to tell it exactly what to do in a strict way, because computers don’t have common sense and only understand simple instructions. You have learned that Python can evaluate expressions (that is, reduce the expression to a single value), and that expressions are values (such as 2 or 5) combined with operators (such as + or -). You have also learned that you can store values inside of variables so that your program can remember them in order to use them later on.

There are many other types of operators and values in Python. In the next chapter, we will go over some more basic concepts, and you’ll write your first program!

